Contents of the Room:
Task 1: Introducing LAN Topologies
Task 2: A Primer on Subnetting
Task 3: The ARP Protocol
Task 4: The DHCP Protocol
Task 5: Continue Your Learning: OSI Model

Task 1: Introducing LAN Topologies
Q: What does LAN stand for?
By reading the article provided in this task I have learned about LAN topology such as Star Topology, Bus Topology, Ring Topology and Switch, Router etc.
A: Local Area Network

Q: What is the verb given to the job that Routers perform?
It’s a router’s job to connect networks and pass data between them. It does this by using routing (hence the name router!).
Routing is the label given to the process of data travelling across networks. Routing involves creating a path between networks so that this data can be successfully delivered.
A: Routing

Q: What device is used to centrally connect multiple devices on the local network and transmit data to the correct location?
From the article given on this task I have learned that Switches are dedicated devices within a network that are designed to aggregate multiple other devices. 
Switches keep track of what device is connected to which port. This way, when they receive a packet, instead of repeating that packet to every port like a hub would do, it just sends it to the intended target, thus reducing network traffic.
A: Switch

Q: What topology is cost-efficient to set up?
Bus topologies are one of the easier and more cost-efficient topologies to set up because of their expenses, such as cabling or dedicated networking equipment used to connect these devices.
A: Bus Topology

Q: What topology is expensive to set up and maintain?
From the article on this task I learned that because more cabling and the purchase of dedicated networking equipment is required for Star topology, it is more expensive than any of the other topologies.
A: Star Topology

Q: Complete the interactive lab attached to this task. What is the flag given at the end?
I followed the interactive splited tab of THM and after completing the tasks found the flag.
A: THM{TOPO______}

Task 2: A Primer on Subnetting
Q: What is the technical term for dividing a network up into smaller pieces?
From the article provided in this task I learned that subnetting is the term given to splitting up a network into smaller, miniature networks within itself.
A: Subnetting

Q: How many bits are in a subnet mask?
Subnet mask is represented as a number of four bytes (32 bits), ranging from 0 to 255 (0–255).
A: 32

Q: What is the range of a section (octet) of a subnet mask?
A: 0–255

Q: What address is used to identify the start of a network?
I learned that subnets use IP addresses in three different ways:
1. Network Address:
This address identifies the start of the actual network and is used to identify a network’s existence.
2. Host Address:
An IP address here is used to identify a device on the subnet
3. Default Gateway:
The default gateway address is a special address assigned to a device on the network that is capable of sending information to another network
A: Network Address

Q: What address is used to identify devices within a network?
A: Host Address

Q: What is the name used to identify the device responsible for sending data to another network?
A: Default Gateway

Task 3: The ARP Protocol
Q: What does ARP stand for?
From the article provided on this task I learned that ARP stands for Address Resolution Protocol.
A: Address Resolution Protocol

Q: What category of ARP Packet asks a device whether or not it has a specific IP address?
In order to map IP address and MAC address, the ARP protocol sends two types of messages:
ARP Request
ARP Reply
When an ARP request is sent, a message is broadcasted to every other device found on a network by the device, asking whether or not the device’s MAC address matches the requested IP address. If the device does have the requested IP address, an ARP reply is returned to the initial device to acknowledge this. The initial device will now remember this and store it within its cache (an ARP entry).
A: Request

Q: What address is used as a physical identifier for a device on a network?
Learned from “What is Network” room that devices on a network will all have a physical network interface, which is a microchip board found on the device’s motherboard. This network interface is assigned a unique address at the factory it was built at, called a MAC (Media Access Control ) address.
A: MAC Address

Q: What address is used as a logical identifier for a device on a network?
Learned from “What is Network” room that IP address (or Internet Protocol) address can be used as a way of identifying a host on a network for a period of time.
A: IP Address

Task 4: The DHCP Protocol
Q: What type of DHCP packet is used by a device to retrieve an IP address?
From the provided article I got that when a device connects to a network, if it has not already been manually assigned an IP address, it sends out a request (DHCP Discover) to see if any DHCP servers are on the network. The DHCP server then replies back with an IP address the device could use (DHCP Offer). The device then sends a reply confirming it wants the offered IP Address (DHCP Request), and then lastly, the DHCP server sends a reply acknowledging this has been completed, and the device can start using the IP Address (DHCP ACK).
A: DHCP Discover

Q: What type of DHCP packet does a device send once it has been offered an IP address by the DHCP server?
A: DHCP Request

Q: Finally, what is the last DHCP packet that is sent to a device from a DHCP server?
A: DHCP ACK

Task 5: Continue Your Learning: OSI Model
Q: Join the “OSI Model” room.
A: No answer needed

