Linux Fundamentals Part 2 — Cyber Security 101 — Linux Fundamentals — TryHackMe Walkthrough

Task 1 Introduction

Welcome to the second part of the reworked “Linux Fundamentals” series. We’ll be applying our knowledge from the first installment in this series, so I highly recommend you completing that room before proceeding further.
In part 2, we’ll be ditching the in-browser functionality and help you get started in what is a fundamental skill in being able to login to and control the terminals of remote machines. Not only this, but the room will also have you:
Unlocking the potential of your first few commands by introducing you to using flags and arguments
Advancing your knowledge of the filesystem to perform some more useful commands such as copying and moving files
Discovering how access to files and folders is managed and how we can determine our access.
Running your first few scripts and executables!
Answer the questions below

Let’s proceed!

Task 2 Accessing Your Linux Machine Using SSH (Deploy)

The in-browser functionality was used in Linux Fundamentals Part 1 to get you directly connected to your first ever Linux machine without any hassle.
In fact, the in-browser functionality uses the exact same protocol that we are going to be using today. This protocol is called Secure Shell or SSH for short and is the common means of connecting to and interacting with the command line of a remote Linux machine.
We will be deploying two machines in this room:
Your Linux machine
The TryHackMe AttackBox

What is SSH & how Does it Work?
Secure Shell or SSH simply is a protocol between devices in an encrypted form. Using cryptography, any input we send in a human-readable format is encrypted for travelling over a network — where it is then unencrypted once it reaches the remote machine, such as in the diagram below.

You can learn about the various types of encryption on a TryHackMe room. But for now, we only need to understand that:
SSH allows us to remotely execute commands on another device remotely.
Any data sent between the devices is encrypted when it is sent over a network such as the Internet.

Deploying Your Linux Machine

Press the green “Start Machine” button on the top-right of this task and then scroll to the top of the page to see the deployment information like so:
Press enter or click to view image in full size
The IP address displayed is the address of your Linux machine that you will be logging into using SSH. Take note of this for now.

Deploying the TryHackMe AttackBox
Looking at the top of the page, press the “Start AttackBox” button to deploy the TryHackMe AttackBox that we will be interacting with. The TryHackMe AttackBox is a Ubuntu Linux machine that is hosted online in the cloud and can be interacted with via your browser. You will be using this to interact with the machine that you deploy in this task.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Using SSH to Login to Your Linux Machine

The syntax to use SSH is very simple. We only need to provide two things:
1. The IP address of the remote machine
2. Correct credentials to a valid account to login with on the remote machine
For this room, we will be logging in as “tryhackme”, whose password is “tryhackme” without the quotation (“”) marks. Let’s use the IP address of the machine displayed in the card at the top of the room as the IP address and this user, to construct a command to log in to the remote machine using SSH. The command to do so is ssh and then the username of the account, @ the IP address of the machine.
But first, we need to open a terminal on the TryHackMe AttackBox. There is an icon placed on the desktop named “Terminal”. And now, we can proceed to input commands.

For example: ssh tryhackme@MACHINE_IP . Replacing the IP address with the IP address for your Linux target machine. Once executed, we will then be asked to trust the host and then provide a password for the "tryhackme" account, which is also "tryhackme".
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Now that we are connected, any commands that we execute will now execute on the remote machine — not our own.
Note: When you type a password into an ssh login prompt there is no visible feedback — you will not be able to see any text or symbols appear as you type the password. It is still working, however, so just type the password and press enter to login.

Answer the questions below
I’ve logged into the Linux Fundamentals Part 2 machine using SSH!
root@ip-10-10-247-120:~# ssh tryhackme@<ip>


Task 3 Introduction to Flags and Switches

A majority of commands allow for arguments to be provided. These arguments are identified by a hyphen and a certain keyword known as flags or switches.
We’ll later discuss how we can identify what commands allow for arguments to be provided and understanding what these do exactly.
When using a command, unless otherwise specified, it will perform its default behaviour. For example, ls lists the contents of the working directory. However, hidden files are not shown. We can use flags and switches to extend the behaviour of commands.
Using our ls example, ls informs us that there is only one folder named "folder1" as highlighted in the screenshot below. Note that the contents in the screenshots below are only examples.
Using ls to view the contents of a directory

tryhackme@linux2:~$ ls
folder1
tryhackme@linux2:~$
However, after using the -a argument (short for --all), we now suddenly have an output with a few more files and folders such as ".hiddenfolder". Files and folders with "." are hidden files.
Using ls to view hidden folders

tryhackme@linux2:~$ ls -a 
.hiddenfolder folder1
tryhackme@linux2:~$
Commands that accept these will also have a --help option. This option will list the possible options that the command accepts, provide a brief description and example of how to use it.

Listing the options we can use with ls

tryhackme@linux2:~$ ls --help
Usage: ls [OPTION]... [FILE]...

List information about the FILEs (the current directory by default).
Sort entries alphabetically if none of -cftuvSUX nor --sort is specified.
Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options too.
  -a, --all                  do not ignore entries starting with .
  -A, --almost-all           do not list implied . and ..
      --author               with -l, print the author of each file
  -b, --escape               print C-style escapes for nongraphic characters
      --block-size=SIZE      with -l, scale sizes by SIZE when printing them;
                               e.g., '--block-size=M'; see SIZE format below
  -B, --ignore-backups       do not list implied entries ending with ~
  -c                         with -lt: sort by, and show, ctime (time of last
                               modification of file status information);
                               with -l: show ctime and sort by name;
                               otherwise: sort by ctime, newest first
  -C                         list entries by columns
      --color[=WHEN]         colorize the output; WHEN can be 'always' (default
                               if omitted), 'auto', or 'never'; more info below
  -d, --directory            list directories themselves, not their contents
  -D, --dired                generate output designed for Emacs' dired mode
  -f                         do not sort, enable -aU, disable -ls --color
  -F, --classify             append indicator (one of */=>@|) to entries
      --file-type            likewise, except do not append '*'
      --format=WORD          across -x, commas -m, horizontal -x, long -l,
                               single-column -1, verbose -l, vertical -C
      --full-time            like -l --time-style=full-iso
  -g                         like -l, but do not list owner
      --group-directories-first

tryhackme@linux2:~$
This option is, in fact, a formatted output of what is called the man page (short for manual), which contains documentation for Linux commands and applications.

The Man(ual) Page

The manual pages are a great source of information for both system commands and applications available on both a Linux machine, which is accessible on the machine itself and online.

To access this documentation, we can use the man command and then provide the command we want to read the documentation for. Using our ls example, we would use man ls to view the manual pages for ls like so:

Listing the options we can use with ls

tryhackme@linux2:~$ man ls
LS(1)                                               User Commands                                               LS(1)
NAME
       ls - list directory contents
SYNOPSIS
       ls [OPTION]... [FILE]...
DESCRIPTION
       List  information  about the FILEs (the current directory by default).  Sort entries alphabetically if none of
       -cftuvSUX nor --sort is specified.
       Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options too.
       -a, --all
              do not ignore entries starting with .
       -A, --almost-all
              do not list implied . and ..
       --author
              with -l, print the author of each file
       -b, --escape
              print C-style escapes for nongraphic characters
       --block-size=SIZE
              with -l, scale sizes by SIZE when printing them; e.g., '--block-size=M'; see SIZE format below
 Manual page ls(1) line 1 (press h for help or q to quit)


Answer the questions below

3.1 Explore the manual page of the ls command
(man ls)
Answer: No answer needed

3.2 What directional arrow key would we use to navigate down the manual page?
Answer: down

3.3 What flag would we use to display the output in a “human-readable” way?
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Answer: -h

Task 4 Filesystem Interaction Continued

We covered some of the most fundamental commands when interacting with the filesystem on the Linux machine. For example, we covered how to list and find the contents of folders using ls and find and navigating the filesystem using cd.
In this task, we’re going to learn some more commands for interacting with the filesystem to allow us to:
create files and folders
move files and folders
delete files and folders
More specifically, the following commands:
CommandFull NamePurposetouchtouchCreate filemkdirmake directoryCreate a foldercpcopyCopy a file or foldermvmoveMove a file or folderrmremoveRemove a file or folderfilefileDetermine the type of a file
Protip: Similarly to using cat, we can provide full file paths, i.e. directory1/directory2/note for all of these commands

