TryHackMe — Networking Secure Protocols | Cyber Security 101


Task 1:Introduction

In the Networking Core Protocols room, we learned about the protocols used to browse the web and access email, among others. These protocols work great; however, they cannot protect the confidentiality, integrity, or authenticity of the data transferred. In simpler terms, when we say that confidentiality is not protected, it means that someone watching the packets can read your password or credit card information when sent over HTTP. Similarly, they can access your private documents when sent via email. As for not protecting the integrity of the data, it means that an adversary can change the contents of the transferred data; in other words, if you authorise the payment of one hundred pounds, they can easily change it to another value, such as eight hundred pounds. 
Authenticity means ensuring we are talking with the correct server, not a fake one. Important online transactions are risky without ensuring confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity.

Similarly, it is deemed insecure to remotely access a system using the TELNET protocol; Secure Shell (SSH) was created to provide a secure way to access remote systems. Furthermore, SSH is an extensible protocol that offers added security features for other protocols.

Room Prerequisites
This room is the last in a group of four rooms about computer networking:

Networking Concepts
Networking Essentials
Networking Core Protocols
Networking Secure Protocols (this room)

We recommend finishing all the previous three rooms before starting this one.

Learning Objectives
Upon finishing this room, you will learn about:

SSL/TLS

How to secure existing plaintext protocols:

HTTP
SMTP
POP3
IMAP
How SSH replaced the plaintext TELNET

How VPN creates a secure network over an insecure one



Task 2:TLS


TLS (Transport Layer Security) is a cryptographic protocol that secures communication over networks by providing confidentiality and integrity. It operates at the Transport Layer of the OSI model. TLS is an evolution of SSL (Secure Sockets Layer), with TLS 1.3 being the latest version, introduced in 2018.

Example:
In the 1990s, before TLS, attackers could easily capture unencrypted data, such as login credentials, simply by intercepting network traffic. With the introduction of SSL and later TLS, sensitive information like usernames and passwords is encrypted during transmission.

Key Concepts:

TLS secures data at the Transport Layer of the OSI model.
When implemented, it encrypts all data exchanged between a client and a server, ensuring confidentiality and integrity.

Certificates in TLS
Before secure communication begins, a server (or client) needs a signed TLS certificate to verify its identity. This certificate is issued by a Certificate Authority (CA) after the server submits a Certificate Signing Request (CSR).

Key Points:

Trusted Certificates: Certificates from trusted CAs are automatically recognized by web browsers.
Self-Signed Certificates: These are not recommended for verifying authenticity, as they are not validated by a third party.
Example:
Many websites use trusted certificates issued by CAs like Let’s Encrypt, which offers free certificates. Self-signed certificates may be used for internal or testing purposes but are less secure.


Answer the questions below

What is the protocol name that TLS upgraded and built upon?
Answer: SSL

Which type of certificates should not be used to confirm the authenticity of a server?
Answer: salf-signed certificate




Task 3:HTTPS


HTTP
As we studied in the Networking Core Protocols room, HTTP relies on TCP and uses port 80 by default. 
We also saw how all HTTP traffic was sent in cleartext for anyone to intercept and monitor. The screenshot below is from the previous room, 
and it gives a clear idea of how an adversary can easily read all the traffic exchanged between the client and the server.

Let’s take a minute to review the most common steps before a web browser can request a page over HTTP. After resolving the domain name to an IP address, the client will carry out the following two steps:

Establish a TCP three-way handshake with the target server
Communicate using the HTTP protocol; for example, issue HTTP requests, such as GET / HTTP/1.1
The two steps described above are shown in the window below. The three packets for the TCP handshake (marked with 1) precede the first HTTP packet with GET in it. The HTTP communication is marked with 2.
The last three displayed packets are for TCP connection termination and are marked with 3.

HTTP Over TLS
HTTPS stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure. It is basically HTTP over TLS. Consequently, requesting a page over HTTPS will require the following three steps (after resolving the domain name):

Establish a TCP three-way handshake with the target server
Establish a TLS session
Communicate using the HTTP protocol; for example, issue HTTP requests, such as GET / HTTP/1.1

Getting the Encryption Key
Adding TLS to HTTP leads to all the packets being encrypted. We can no longer see the contents of the exchanged packets unless we get access to the private key. Although it is improbable that we will have
access to the keys used for encryption in a TLS session, we repeated the above screenshots after providing the decryption key to Wireshark. The TCP and TLS handshakes don’t change; the main difference starts with the HTTP protocol marked 3. For instance, we can see when the client issues a GET.


Answer the questions below

How many packets did the TLS negotiation and establishment take in the Wireshark HTTPS screenshots above?
Answer: 8

What is the number of the packet that contain the GET /login when accessing the website over HTTPS?
Answer: 10




Task 4:SMTPS, POP3S, and IMAPS


Adding TLS to protocols like SMTP, POP3, and IMAP secures email communication. These protocols become SMTPS, POP3S, and IMAPS respectively, ensuring email data is encrypted as it travels across the network.

SMTPS: Secure Mail Transfer Protocol over TLS.
POP3S: Secure Post Office Protocol (email retrieval) over TLS.
IMAPS: Secure Internet Message Access Protocol (email synchronization) over TLS.


Example:
Using IMAPS ensures that emails you read on multiple devices (like a phone and laptop) are synchronized securely, preventing eavesdroppers from accessing sensitive information.


Answer the questions below

If you capture network traffic, in which of the following protocols can you extract login credentials: SMTPS, POP3S, or IMAP?
Answer: IMAP



Task 5:SSH

SSH (Secure Shell) is a protocol used to securely log in to remote systems. It provides encrypted communication, which protects the integrity and confidentiality of the connection. SSH replaced older, 
insecure methods like Telnet, where all data, including passwords, was sent in cleartext.


OpenSSH offers several benefits. We will list a few key points:

Secure authentication: Besides password-based authentication, SSH supports public key and two-factor authentication.
Confidentiality: OpenSSH provides end-to-end encryption, protecting against eavesdropping. Furthermore, it notifies you of new server keys to protect against man-in-the-middle attacks.
Integrity: In addition to protecting the confidentiality of the exchanged data, cryptography also protects the integrity of the traffic.
Tunneling: SSH can create a secure “tunnel” to route other protocols through SSH. This setup leads to a VPN-like connection.
X11 Forwarding: If you connect to a Unix-like system with a graphical user interface, SSH allows you to use the graphical application over the network.

You would issue the command ssh username@hostname to connect to an SSH server. If the username is the same as your logged-in username, you only need ssh hostname. Then, you will be asked for a password; however, if public-key authentication is used, you will be logged in immediately.

The screenshot below shows an example of running Wireshark on a remote Kali Linux system. The argument -X is required to support running graphical interfaces, for example, ssh 192.168.124.148 -X. (The local system needs to have a suitable graphical system installed.)


While the TELNET server listens on port 23, the SSH server listens on port 22.



Answer the questions below

What is the name of the open-source implementation of the SSH protocol?
Answer: OpenSSH



Task 6:SFTP and FTPS


SFTP (SSH File Transfer Protocol) and FTPS (File Transfer Protocol Secure) both provide secure ways to transfer files, but they use different underlying technologies.

SFTP: Part of the SSH protocol suite, operating on port 22.
FTPS: Uses TLS for security, similar to HTTPS, and typically operates on port 990.
Example:

sftp user@hostname


This command establishes a secure file transfer session using SFTP, ensuring that all file uploads and downloads are encrypted.



Answer the questions below

Click on the View Site button to access the related site. Please follow the instructions on the site to obtain the flag.
Answer: THM{Protocols_secur3d}




Task 7:VPN


A VPN (Virtual Private Network) creates a secure tunnel between a client and a VPN server, allowing users to access remote networks as if they were directly connected. VPNs are widely used by companies to allow employees to securely access internal resources from remote locations.

Key Features:

Encryption: VPNs encrypt all traffic between the client and server.
Anonymity: VPN users appear to be coming from the VPN server’s IP address rather than their actual location.

Example:
A remote employee can use a VPN to connect securely to their company’s network and access shared files and applications, just as if they were in the office.

Once a VPN tunnel is established, all our Internet traffic will usually be routed over the VPN connection, i.e. via the VPN tunnel. Consequently, when we try to access an Internet service or web application, they will not see our public IP address but the VPN server’s. This is why some Internet users connect over VPN to circumvent geographical restrictions. Furthermore, the local ISP will only see encrypted traffic, which limits its ability to censor Internet access.

In other words, if a user connects to a VPN server in Japan, they will appear to the servers they access as if located in Japan. These servers will customise their experience accordingly, such as redirecting them to the Japanese version of the service. The screenshot below shows the Google Search page after connecting to a VPN server in Japan.

Finally, although in many scenarios, one would establish a VPN connection to route all the traffic over the VPN tunnel, some VPN connections don’t do this. The VPN server may be configured to give you access to a private network but not to route your traffic. Furthermore, some VPN servers leak your actual IP address, although they are expected to route all your traffic over the VPN. Depending on why you are using a VPN connection, you might need to run a few more tests, such as a DNS leak test.

Finally, some countries consider using VPNs illegal and even punishable. Please check the local laws and regulations before using VPNs, especially while travelling.



Answer the questions below

What would you use to connect the various company sites so that users at a remote office can access resources located within the main branch?
Answer: VPN



Task 8:Closing Notes


In summary, TLS plays a crucial role in securing modern internet communications. It provides a framework for securing a wide range of protocols, including HTTP, SMTP, IMAP, and more. Together with SSH and VPNs, these technologies protect data integrity and confidentiality, enabling secure remote access, file transfers, and online transactions.

The combination of these protocols ensures that sensitive data — whether in transit, email, or file transfers — remains secure and inaccessible to attackers.

We have set the browser to log the session’s TLS keys so we can take a closer look at the traffic using Wireshark. This logging was achieved by adding an extra option to the browser shortcut. Executing chromium --ssl-key-log-file=~/ssl-key.log dumps the TLS keys to the ssl-key.log file.

The packet capture file is called randy-chromium.pcapng and is saved in the Documents folder. When you open the packet capture file in Wireshark, you can configure Wireshark to use the ssl-key.log file so that all the TLS traffic gets decrypted. You can see the five steps to achieve this in the two screenshots below.

First, after right-clicking anywhere, choose “Protocol Preferences.” From the submenu, select “Transport Layer Security.” Thirdly, click on “Open Transport Layer Security preferences.”


Clicking “Open Transport Layer Security preferences” will show a dialog box. You must click the “Browse” button marked with four to locate the ssl-key.log. You can find it in the Documents directory. Finally, click OK, and Wireshark will show all the TLS decrypted. One of these packets contains login credentials.

