Tryhackme Walk-through Room — Windows Fundamentals 3

We will continue our journey exploring the Windows operating system.
To summarize the previous two rooms:
In Windows Fundamentals 1, we covered the desktop, the file system, user account control, the control panel, settings, and the task manager. 
In Windows Fundamentals 2, we covered various utilities, such as System Configuration, Computer Management, Resource Monitor, etc. 
This module will attempt to provide an overview of the security features within the Windows operating system.

Press the Start Machine button below to launch the attached virtual machine.
If you wish to access the virtual machine via Remote Desktop, use the credentials below. 

Machine IP: MACHINE_IP
User: administrator
Password: letmein123!

Accept the Certificate when prompted, and you should be logged into the remote system now.
Note: The virtual machine may take up to 3 minutes to load.




Task 2: Windows Updates

Let's start things off with Windows Update. 
Windows Update is a service provided by Microsoft to provide security updates, feature enhancements, and patches for the Windows operating system and other Microsoft products, such as Microsoft Defender. 
Updates are typically released on the 2nd Tuesday of each month. This day is called Patch Tuesday. That doesn't necessarily mean that a critical update/patch has to wait for the next Patch Tuesday to be released. If the update is urgent, then Microsoft will push the update via the Windows Update service to the Windows devices.
Refer to the following link to see the Microsoft Security Update Guide here(opens in new tab).  
Windows Update is located in Settings. See below.
Tip: Another way to access Windows Update is from the Run dialog box, or CMD, by running the command control /name Microsoft.WindowsUpdate.

In the attached VM, there are a few things to highlight. 
The Windows Update settings are 'managed'. (Typically, home users will not see this type of message) 
There are no available updates available for the virtual machine. (The attached virtual machine does not have Internet access to communicate with Microsoft to obtain new updates)

Throughout the years, Windows users have grown accustomed to pushing Windows Updates off to a later date or not installing the updates at all. Various reasons caused this action, one being the fact that a reboot is typically required after a Windows update.  
Microsoft notably addressed this issue with Windows 10. The updates can no longer be ignored or pushed to the side until forgotten. Windows updates can only be postponed, but eventually, the update will happen, and your computer will reboot. Microsoft provides these updates to keep the device safe and secure. 
Below is an image showing how a Restart required looks and the several options available regarding scheduling the restart.
Refer to the Windows Updates FAQ(opens in new tab) for more information.

Answer the questions below
Q.There were two definition updates installed in the attached VM. On what date were these updates installed?
  This can be found by clicking on the View Update History link
  Answer: 5/3/2021



Task 3: Windows Security
Per Microsoft, "Windows Security is your home to manage the tools that protect your device and your data".
In case you missed it, Windows Security is also available in Settings. 
In the above image, focus your attention on Protection areas.
Virus & threat protection
Firewall & network protection
App & browser control
Device security
Each following task will briefly touch on these areas.
Before proceeding, let's provide a quick comment on the status icons.
Green means your device is sufficiently protected, and there aren't any recommended actions.
Yellow means there is a safety recommendation for you to review.
Red is a warning that something needs your immediate attention.
Click on Open Windows Security. 

Note: Since the attached VM is a Windows Server 2019 edition, it looks different from a Windows 10 Home or Professional edition. 
The below image is from a Windows 10 device.
Next, we'll look at Virus & threat protection.

Answer the questions below
Q. Checking the Security section on your VM, which area needs immediate attention?
Answer:rus & Threat Protection



Task 4: Virus & threat protection

This section is divided into Current threats and Settings.
Current Threats allows you to perform scans:

Quick scan: Checks common threat locations.
Full scan: Checks all files (can take over an hour).
Custom scan: User-selected locations.
Settings allow you to manage:

Real-time protection: Actively stops malware from running.
Cloud-delivered protection: Accesses the latest threat data from the cloud.
Exclusions: Items you tell the antivirus to ignore.

Answer the questions below
Question: Specifically, what is turned off that Windows is notifying you to turn on?
Navigate to Virus & threat protection. You will see a specific setting flagged as “Off”.
Answer: Real-time protection



Task 5: Firewall & Network Protection
A firewall controls traffic flowing in and out of your device via ports. Think of it as a security guard checking the ID of everything trying to enter or exit your network.
Windows Firewall offers three profiles:
Domain: Used when the computer is connected to a corporate domain controller.
Private: Used for trusted home or work networks.
Public: The default for untrusted networks (like coffee shop Wi-Fi). This is the most restrictive profile.
You can manage these via the GUI or using the command WF.msc.

Answer the questions below
Question: If you were connected to airport Wi-Fi, what most likely will be the active firewall profile?
Based on the definitions above, an airport offers a public connection. You can also verify this by checking the active profile in the Firewall settings.
Answer: Public network



Task 6: App & Browser Control
This section manages Microsoft Defender SmartScreen, which protects against phishing sites, malicious downloads, and unrecognized apps.
It also contains Exploit Protection, a built-in feature to mitigate common attack techniques (like memory buffer overflows) against the system.

(No answer needed for this task)



Task 7: Device Security
This section covers hardware-based security features designed to protect the integrity of the device.
Core Isolation A virtualization-based security feature. Memory Integrity is a subset of this which prevents attacks from inserting malicious code into high-security processes.
Security Processor (TPM) The Trusted Platform Module (TPM) is a dedicated crypto-processor chip on the motherboard designed to secure hardware. It makes the machine tamper-resistant and stores cryptographic keys. It ensures that malicious software cannot tamper with the security functions of the machine.

Answer the questions below
Question: What is the TPM?
Answer: Trusted Platform Module


